markdown/intro_financial_markets.md, before:

# Financial Markets

## Introduction

## The purpose of financial markets

Financial markets are a solution to a problem perennial to our
societies: the efficient channelling of savings into productive uses.
Legal and natural persons who have excess cash seek to obtain the
maximum returns (investment) with the maximum availability (liquidity).
Therefore, they would prefer to lend money short - term. Those however
who need cash in order to fund their ventures (new companies, new
business plans for existing companies, acquisition of assets like houses
via mortgages, social programs, etc) prefer to pay the minimal
compensation possible and retain the funds for long-term. The lack of a
mechanism to be able to accommodate those opposing objectives might lead
to a society where excess funds remain idle instead of being channeled
to productive uses.

Modern capitalist societies solve this problem in two ways, which form
the backbone of the financial system: the banking system and financial
markets.

### The Banking System

In the banking system the center is the bank, an institution or private
company that offers short-term deposits with high availability to those
with excess funds, and long-term loans to those who need funds. A
capital cushion based on short-term loans or directly cash is maintained
in order to fulfills withdrawals. Their activity is not exempt from
risks:

-   liquidity risk, which can happens if the demand to withdraw deposits
    exceeds the capital cushion, and depositors cannot be satisfied
    (bank run)

-   credit risk, which happens when borrowers of funds default on their
    obligations and don't give back those funds.

Banks compensate those risks by charging a spread between interest of
loans and interest of deposits, on top of a margin to pay for their
operations. The banking system has traditionally being the central core
of the financial system in Europe.

### Financial markets

In financial markets, those who need funds issue financial instruments,
legally binding contracts that articulate the terms in which those funds
will be returned to the investor, as well as the compensation for the
service. So far that is not that different from traditional banking
loans. The key for financial instruments is the possibility of
transferring the property of the contract, i.e. the right to receive
back those future cash-flows and compensations. This provides a
mechanism for the lender to potentially recover the funds before the
contract ends, solving the problem of liquidity even if contracts are
issued with long-term horizons.

Of course, for that the lender needs to find a counterpart that is
willing to purchase the financial instrument, and agree to the price.
Pricing financial instruments is however not a simple task, since their
value depend on assumptions about the certainty of those future
cash-flows (for instance, what if the borrower cannot commit in the
future to pay back?). There are also considerations of opportunity
costs, since the potential investor will necessarily compare the return
on its investment when acquiring the financial instrument with other
potential productive uses of her money. Financial markets developed
precisely to solve these two problems: 1) finding counterparts, 2)
setting a price.

Financial markets are the place where interested parties meet and
negotiate the prices of financial instruments. In **primary markets**,
financial instruments are issued by the borrowers and acquire initially
by investors, sometimes via intermediaries like banks. In **secondary
markets**, already issued financial instruments are negotiated between
investors, with the original borrower not playing any part any more in
the process. Most of trading nowadays occurs in secondary markets.

In this process, financial markets not only provide of a mechanism for
investors to obtain liquidity from their investments, but also serve as
a mechanism for price discovery. In the end, in financial markets (as in
other markets), the price of a financial instrument is what two willing
parties agree to transact, independently of the subjective value that
each of them place on the instrument. Of course, by pulling multiple
investors in the same place to negotiate, financial markets channel
multiple speculative ways about the value of a financial instrument into
an actual price. These prices can guide investors about future
decisions.

## Who participate in financial markets?

Financial markets are mostly the domain of legal persons, although
natural persons might participate as investors normally via an
intermediary like a bank or a broker. Financial instruments are issued
by corporations who need to fund their business plans, governments at
many different levels (local, regional, national, supranational) that
seek to fund social programs or public investments, or by banks that
create tailored products for investors.

Financial instruments are acquired by institutional investors like hedge
funds, mutual funds, pension funds or insurance companies, among others,
in order to generate returns for their clients or themselves. Or to
hedge particular risks of their concern. Corporations also acquire
financial instruments to put to work their extra cash, and also to hedge
risks. Banks acquire financial instruments as well to manage their
liquidity, generate returns from deposits and hedge risks. And central
banks use them to control their monetary policy.

## Types of financial instruments and asset classes

Intro, stocks, bonds

those are cash instruments, the backbone of two asset classes, equity
and fixed income

Within fixed income, but also considered sometimes as its own asset
class, money markets

there are also derivatives, as their own asset class, although sometimes
considered part of another asset class, being derived

finally fx, spot transactions (two days), derivatives. fx spot not
considered financial isntrument under mifid 2

commodities per se not financial instrument, but their derivatives are

crypto is considered an \"asset class\", although cryptos are not
financial instruments, i.e. contracts with obligations of payments.
Derivatives of crypto again are financial contracts

Liquidity providers vs liquidity takers

## Market structures

## Equity market structure

## Fixed income market structure

## FX market structure

## Crypto market structure

## Regulation of financial markets

## Exercises

Commit message:

added utility indifference theory of derivatives pricing

markdown/intro_financial_markets.md, after:

# Financial Markets

## Introduction

## The purpose of financial markets

Financial markets are a solution to a problem perennial to our
societies: the efficient channelling of savings into productive uses.
Legal and natural persons who have excess cash seek to obtain the
maximum returns (investment) with the maximum availability (liquidity).
Therefore, they would prefer to lend money short - term. Those however
who need cash in order to fund their ventures (new companies, new
business plans for existing companies, acquisition of assets like houses
via mortgages, social programs, etc) prefer to pay the minimal
compensation possible and retain the funds for long-term. The lack of a
mechanism to be able to accommodate those opposing objectives might lead
to a society where excess funds remain idle instead of being channeled
to productive uses.

Modern capitalist societies solve this problem in two ways, which form
the backbone of the financial system: the banking system and financial
markets.

### The Banking System

In the banking system the center is the bank, an institution or private
company that offers short-term deposits with high availability to those
with excess funds, and long-term loans to those who need funds. A
capital cushion based on short-term loans or directly cash is maintained
in order to fulfills withdrawals. Their activity is not exempt from
risks:

-   liquidity risk, which can happens if the demand to withdraw deposits
    exceeds the capital cushion, and depositors cannot be satisfied
    (bank run)

-   credit risk, which happens when borrowers of funds default on their
    obligations and don't give back those funds.

Banks compensate those risks by charging a spread between interest of
loans and interest of deposits, on top of a margin to pay for their
operations. The banking system has traditionally being the central core
of the financial system in Europe.

### Financial markets

In financial markets, those who need funds issue financial instruments,
legally binding contracts that articulate the terms in which those funds
will be returned to the investor, as well as the compensation for the
service. So far that is not that different from traditional banking
loans. The key for financial instruments is the possibility of
transferring the property of the contract, i.e. the right to receive
back those future cash-flows and compensations. This provides a
mechanism for the lender to potentially recover the funds before the
contract ends, solving the problem of liquidity even if contracts are
issued with long-term horizons.

Of course, for that the lender needs to find a counterpart that is
willing to purchase the financial instrument, and agree to the price.
Pricing financial instruments is however not a simple task, since their
value depend on assumptions about the certainty of those future
cash-flows (for instance, what if the borrower cannot commit in the
future to pay back?). There are also considerations of opportunity
costs, since the potential investor will necessarily compare the return
on its investment when acquiring the financial instrument with other
potential productive uses of her money. Financial markets developed
precisely to solve these two problems: 1) finding counterparts, 2)
setting a price.

Financial markets are the place where interested parties meet and
negotiate the prices of financial instruments. In **primary markets**,
financial instruments are issued by the borrowers and acquire initially
by investors, sometimes via intermediaries like banks. In **secondary
markets**, already issued financial instruments are negotiated between
investors, with the original borrower not playing any part any more in
the process. Most of trading nowadays occurs in secondary markets.

In this process, financial markets not only provide of a mechanism for
investors to obtain liquidity from their investments, but also serve as
a mechanism for price discovery. In the end, in financial markets (as in
other markets), the price of a financial instrument is what two willing
parties agree to transact, independently of the subjective value that
each of them place on the instrument. Of course, by pulling multiple
investors in the same place to negotiate, financial markets channel
multiple speculative ways about the value of a financial instrument into
an actual price. These prices can guide investors about future
decisions.

## Who participate in financial markets?

Financial markets are mostly the domain of legal persons, although
natural persons might participate as investors normally via an
intermediary like a bank or a broker. Financial instruments are issued
by corporations who need to fund their business plans, governments at
many different levels (local, regional, national, supranational) that
seek to fund social programs or public investments, or by banks that
create tailored products for investors.

Financial instruments are acquired by institutional investors like hedge
funds, mutual funds, pension funds or insurance companies, among others,
in order to generate returns for their clients or themselves. Or to
hedge particular risks of their concern. Corporations also acquire
financial instruments to put to work their extra cash, and also to hedge
risks. Banks acquire financial instruments as well to manage their
liquidity, generate returns from deposits and hedge risks. And central
banks use them to control their monetary policy.

## Types of financial instruments and asset classes

Intro, stocks, bonds

those are cash instruments, the backbone of two asset classes, equity
and fixed income

Within fixed income, but also considered sometimes as its own asset
class, money markets

there are also derivatives, as their own asset class, although sometimes
considered part of another asset class, being derived

finally fx, spot transactions (two days), derivatives. fx spot not
considered financial isntrument under mifid 2

commodities per se not financial instrument, but their derivatives are

crypto is considered an \"asset class\", although cryptos are not
financial instruments, i.e. contracts with obligations of payments.
Derivatives of crypto again are financial contracts

Liquidity providers vs liquidity takers

## Market structures

## Equity market structure

## Fixed income market structure

## FX market structure

## Derivatives markets

### Introduction to derivatives


Derivatives are financial instruments whose value depends on the price of an underlying instrument, hence the name "derivative".

Note: Focus on derivatives traded in markets in contrast to OTC

### Linear derivatives: Fowards, Futures and ETFs

### Options

Options are derivatives contracts that grant the holder the  the option (hence the name) to buy or sell (depending on the option) a given financial instrument (the underlying) at a price at time contingent to the clauses of the contract. The most simple option, the European option, pre-specifies a given time $T$, the expire, and price $K$, to exercise this option. But there are many other variations in the market. An option to buy a financial instrument is referred as a call option, and an option to sell is a put option. 

Let us consider european options of stocks. If the market price of the stock at the exprity is $S_T$, a call option will be exercised by a rational investor only if the price is higher than the strike $K$, making a profit of $S_T-K$, which in some cases is directly paid in cash, in others the actual stock is received, but of course it could be directly sold in the market at a favourable price. Therefore, the payoff of a call option can be written as:

$$C_T = (S_T-K)^+$$

where $(.)^+$ denotes the positive part of the argument. On the contrary, a put option will only be exercised if the market price is below the strike, hence the payoff is:

$$P_T = (K-S_T)^+$$

Options can be traded in regulated markets or be quoted by bank dealers. Since the investor that holds the option cannot lose money from it, such option does not come for free, and the question is how much is worth such option, which is called the premium of the option. At expiry, the price is naturally the payoff function. What at at time $t < T$ there is still  uncertainty about the price $S_T$ which will determine the final profit (if any), so the premium will be different. But how much? That is the subject of the theory of option pricing.


## Crypto market structure

## Regulation of financial markets

## Exercises
